1
Discriminative–Generative Target Speaker
Extraction with Decoder-Only Language Models
Bang Zeng, Student Member, IEEE, Beilong Tang, Wang Xiang, Ming Li∗, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—Target speaker extraction (TSE) aims to recover
the speech signal of a desired speaker from a mixed audio
recording, given a short enrollment utterance. Most existing TSE
approaches are based on discriminative modeling paradigms.
Although effective at suppressing interfering speakers, these
methods often struggle to produce speech with high perceptual
quality and naturalness. To address this limitation, we first
propose LauraTSE, a generative TSE model built upon an
auto-regressive decoder-only language model. However, purely
generative approaches may suffer from hallucinations, content
drift, and limited controllability, which may undermine their
reliability in complex acoustic scenarios. To overcome these
challenges, we further introduce a discriminative–generative TSE
framework. In this framework, a discriminative front-end is
employed to robustly extract the target speaker’s speech, yielding
stable and controllable intermediate representations. A generative
back-end then operates in the neural audio codec representation
space to reconstruct fine-grained speech details and enhance
perceptual quality. This two-stage design effectively combines
the robustness and controllability of discriminative models with
the superior naturalness and quality enhancement capabilities
of generative models. Moreover, we systematically investigate
collaborative training strategies for the proposed framework,
including freezing or fine-tuning the front-end, incorporating
an auxiliary SI-SDR loss, and exploring both auto-regressive
and non-auto-regressive inference mechanisms. Experimental
results demonstrate that the proposed framework achieves a
more favorable trade-off among speech quality, intelligibility, and
speaker consistency.
Index
Terms—Target
speaker
extraction,
Auto-regressive
decoder-only language model, Discriminative–generative, Speech
quality, Intelligibility.
I. INTRODUCTION
H
UMANS are capable of selectively attending to a tar-
get speech signal in complex acoustic environments, a
phenomenon known as the cocktail party effect [1], [2]. This
remarkable ability has inspired extensive research on speech
separation. Early approaches, such as non-negative matrix
factorization (NMF) [3], [4] and computational auditory scene
analysis (CASA) [5]–[7], primarily rely on spectro-temporal
masking strategies and are known to degrade in highly com-
plex acoustic conditions. With the advent of deep learning,
neural network-based methods, including deep clustering [8]–
[10], deep attractor networks (DANet) [11]–[13], and permu-
tation invariant training (PIT) [14], [15], have substantially
Bang
Zeng,
Wang
Xiang
and
Ming
Li
are
with
the
School
of
Computer
Science,
Wuhan
University,
Wuhan
430072,
China,
and
also with Suzhou Municipal Key Laboratory of Multimodal Intelligent
Systems, Digital Innovation Research Center, Duke Kunshan Univer-
sity, Kunshan 215316, China. Beilong Tang is with the North Car-
olina State University (e-mail: bangzeng@whu.edu.cn; btang5@ncsu.edu;
2025102110031@whu.edu.cn; ming.li369@dukekunshan.edu.cn).
∗Corresponding author.
improved speech separation performance. In parallel, time-
domain models such as TasNet [16] and its variants further
enhance perceptual quality by enabling more accurate phase
reconstruction. More recently, advanced architectures in both
time and time–frequency domains have continued to push the
performance boundaries of speech separation. Nevertheless,
most existing speech separation methods [17]–[28] aim to
separate all speakers in a mixture and typically require prior
knowledge of the number of sources. These assumptions are
often impractical in real-world scenarios.
In contrast, target speaker extraction (TSE) [29]–[41] fo-
cuses on extracting a desired speaker from a mixture using
auxiliary speaker information, offering a more flexible and
application-oriented solution. Recently, TSE has emerged as an
effective paradigm to address the limitations of conventional
speech separation, particularly in scenarios where the number
of speakers in a mixture is unknown. By leveraging reference
speech, TSE models aim to extract only the target speaker from
complex acoustic mixtures, making them more suitable for
real-world applications. As illustrated in Fig. 1, a typical TSE
framework follows an encoder–separator–decoder architec-
ture, which can be implemented either in the time–frequency
domain using STFT/iSTFT or directly in the time domain
via convolutional operations. Most existing TSE approaches
employ a speaker embedding extractor to derive a compact
representation of the target speaker from the reference ut-
terance, which is then used to guide the separation process.
However, such embedding extractors are commonly optimized
for speaker recognition rather than TSE, and may discard
fine-grained information contained in the reference speech.
This mismatch can limit the effectiveness of embedding-based
TSE methods. Consequently, speaker-embedding-free TSE ap-
proaches [42]–[45] have been proposed to exploit reference
speech representations directly, enabling more precise and
efficient target speaker extraction.
However, most existing TSE methods adopt discrimina-
tive modeling paradigms, which directly learn a determinis-
tic mapping from mixture and reference information to the
target signal. While such models exhibit strong robustness
and controllability in suppressing interfering speakers, they
inherently suffer from several limitations. First, discriminative
models are typically optimized using signal-level distortion
metrics that poorly align with human auditory perception,
leading to limited speech naturalness and perceptual quality.
Second, these models have limited capability to recover fine-
grained speech details that are missing or distorted during the
separation process [46]. In contrast, generative models adopt
a probabilistic modeling perspective and aim to learn the joint
arXiv:2601.06006v1  [eess.AS]  9 Jan 2026
2
Encoder
Speaker
Embedding
Extractor
Decoder
Speaker
Embedding
Mixed
Speech
Reference
Speech
Estimation
separator
C
Fig. 1. The diagram of a typical target speaker extraction method. The speaker embedding extractor is typically a pre-trained speaker recognition model. ’C’
denotes the concatenation.
or conditional distributions among the mixed speech, the clean
target speech, and the enrollment information. By explicitly
modeling the underlying generative process of target speech,
generative approaches can produce multiple plausible speech
estimates under the same input conditions, rather than being
constrained to a single deterministic solution. This property
often results in improved perceptual quality compared to
discriminative methods [47]–[50].
In recent years, various generative frameworks, includ-
ing
diffusion
models
[47]
and
variational
autoencoders
(VAEs) [51] have been increasingly explored for the TSE
task. Among these studies, TSELM [52] leverages discrete
semantic units extracted by WavLM [53] and employs an
encoder-only language model for target speaker extraction.
AnyEnhance [49] adopts a masking-based language model
and constructs a unified framework that supports multiple
speech processing tasks, including TSE. These works provide
preliminary evidence of the potential of generative modeling
for TSE. Nevertheless, as an important class of generative
models, auto-regressive (AR) decoder-only language models
remain relatively underexplored in the context of TSE. Al-
though SpeechX [54] develops a multi-task speech processing
system based on an AR decoder-only LM, it does not directly
address a key question: in a single-task TSE setting, can a
compact AR decoder-only language model provide sufficient
modeling capacity for effective target speaker extraction?
We recently proposed LauraTSE [55], a generative TSE
model based on an auto-regressive (AR) decoder-only lan-
guage model. LauraTSE comprises a compact AR decoder-
only LM that predicts coarse-grained target speech represen-
tations conditioned on continuous representations of the mixed
and reference speech, together with a lightweight encoder-
only LM designed to recover fine-grained acoustic details.
Extensive experimental results demonstrate that LauraTSE can
produce speech with improved perceptual quality. Neverthe-
less, generative models are often sensitive to the design and
discretization of input representations. When discrete represen-
tations fail to preserve fine-grained, speaker-related acoustic
characteristics, even models with strong generative capacity
may struggle to reconstruct the target speaker’s speech accu-
rately. Moreover, LauraTSE remains prone to errors such as
hallucinations, which raise concerns regarding model stability
and reliability.
To address these issues, this study proposes a discrimi-
native–generative two-stage framework for TSE. In the first
stage, a discriminative module is employed to robustly extract
target speaker–related information while effectively suppress-
ing interfering sources, leveraging its strong discrimination
capability. In the second stage, a generative module is intro-
duced to perform distribution-level modeling and high-quality
reconstruction based on the discriminative front-end’s out-
put, thereby further enhancing speech quality. By integrating
the complementary strengths of discriminative and generative
paradigms, the proposed two-stage framework provides a more
robust and effective solution for improving the perceptual
quality of target speaker extraction.
This work extends our previous study on LauraTSE [55].
The main contributions of this article are summarized as
follows:
• We develop an AR decoder-only language model, Lau-
raTSE [55], for the TSE task. By leveraging continuous
acoustic features and neural audio codec representations
as a bridging interface, LauraTSE enables end-to-end
generative modeling for TSE. Extensive experimental
results across multiple objective metrics demonstrate that
the proposed approach achieves improved speech quality
and intelligibility compared with conventional discrimi-
native methods.
• We propose a discriminative–generative two-stage TSE
framework, in which USEF-TFGridNet [45] serves as the
discriminative front-end and LauraTSE [55] acts as the
generative back-end, forming a complete system termed
USEF-Laura-TSE. Through comprehensive experimental
analysis, we investigate the impact of the discriminative
front-end on the reconstruction quality of the generative
back-end, and the feedback of the generative back-end in
suppressing residual interference and artifacts introduced
by the front-end, thereby revealing the interdependence
between the two stages.
• Building upon the proposed discriminative–generative ar-
chitecture, we further investigate both auto-regressive and
non-auto-regressive inference strategies. Without modify-
ing the training procedure, a non-autoregressive inference
scheme is introduced by treating the discriminative front-
end outputs as pseudo-labels, enabling a more favorable
trade-off between speech quality and intelligibility.
II. RELATED WORKS
A. Discriminative Approaches for Target Speaker Extraction
Discriminative target speaker extraction (TSE) methods
have achieved substantial progress in recent years and can
generally be categorized into time-domain and time-frequency
(T-F) domain approaches. Early T-F domain methods estimate
speaker-dependent masks on short-time Fourier transform
3
(STFT) representations. In contrast, time-domain architectures
operate directly on raw waveforms, avoiding explicit phase
reconstruction and thereby improving perceptual quality. Rep-
resentative models such as TasNet [16] and Conv-TasNet [19]
employ convolutional encoder–decoder structures to learn
waveform-level representations. More advanced architectures,
including DPRNN [17], SepFormer [23], and transformer-
based models [22], further enhance extraction performance
by explicitly modeling long-range temporal dependencies and
global contextual information. For the TSE task, target speaker
information is typically incorporated through speaker embed-
dings extracted from reference speech, which are used to guide
the extraction process [29], [30], [56]. In such embedding-
based frameworks, speaker encoders [57]–[60] are integrated
with separation networks via feature concatenation, condition-
ing, or attention mechanisms, and various architectural designs
have been proposed to improve robustness in feature extraction
and cross-stream fusion. More recently, speaker-embedding-
free TSE approaches [42]–[44], [61], [62] have been in-
troduced to bypass fixed-dimensional speaker embeddings.
Instead, these methods directly exploit frame-level acoustic
features and model the contextual interactions between ref-
erence and mixed speech using attention-based mechanisms.
By preserving fine-grained temporal and spectral information,
speaker-embedding-free approaches can effectively mitigate
the information loss and representation mismatch commonly
introduced by speaker embeddings [63], [64].
Despite these advances, most discriminative TSE models
rely on deterministic mappings optimized with signal-level
distortion objectives, which limits their ability to capture the
intrinsic uncertainty and multimodality of speech signals. Con-
sequently, they often struggle to recover fine-grained speech
details and achieve high perceptual naturalness, particularly
under challenging acoustic conditions. These limitations moti-
vate the exploration of generative modeling approaches, which
offer greater flexibility in modeling speech distributions and
provide new opportunities for perceptual quality enhancement
in target speaker extraction.
B. Generative Approaches for Target Speaker Extraction
Generative approaches for target speaker extraction (TSE)
can be broadly categorized into continuous and discrete
modeling paradigms. Continuous generative models, such
as diffusion models [65]–[70] and variational autoencoders
(VAEs) [71], [72], directly model the probability distribution
of speech signals and generate target speech through iterative
denoising or latent-variable reconstruction. These methods ex-
hibit strong modeling capacity and high reconstruction fidelity.
However, their substantial computational cost and inference
latency often limit practical deployment, particularly in real-
time and edge-device scenarios. More recently, increasing
attention has been directed toward discrete representation-
based generative approaches leveraging large language models
(LLMs) [73]–[75]. In such frameworks, speech signals are first
converted into discrete token sequences using neural audio
codecs, then generated conditionally with LLMs, and finally
reconstructed into waveforms via codec decoders. Benefiting
from powerful contextual modeling and sequence genera-
tion capabilities, LLM-based approaches have demonstrated
promising performance across various speech processing tasks,
including speech enhancement, separation, and target speaker
extraction. Among different LLM architectures, decoder-only
models are particularly well-suited for generative speech mod-
eling due to their auto-regressive formulation and their flexibil-
ity for multi-task and multi-modal extensions. Representative
systems show that combining codec-based discrete represen-
tations with decoder-only LLMs can substantially improve
perceptual speech quality and robustness [54], [76], [77].
Despite these advantages, LLM-based generative TSE ap-
proaches still face several challenges. The reliance on dis-
crete token prediction may lead to error accumulation and
stability issues, while the large model size and associated
computational overhead limit inference efficiency. Moreover,
purely generative reconstruction does not always guarantee
stable and reliable performance under diverse acoustic con-
ditions, particularly when the input representations fail to pre-
serve fine-grained, speaker-related information. These obser-
vations motivate the exploration of discriminative-generative
two-stage frameworks for target speaker extraction. In such
frameworks, a discriminative front-end provides reliable tar-
get alignment and effective interference suppression, while a
generative back-end performs distribution-level modeling to
enhance speech quality further. This two-stage design offers a
practical compromise by combining the stability and efficiency
of discriminative models with the perceptual advantages of
generative modeling, thereby enabling more robust and high-
quality target speaker extraction.
III. DISCRIMINATIVE–GENERATIVE TARGET SPEAKER
EXTRACTION
In this section, we first introduce LauraTSE in detail.
We then present the proposed discriminative–generative two-
stage framework, followed by a comprehensive description
of its architecture and design principles. Finally, to validate
the effectiveness of the two-stage framework, we construct
a complete system, USEF-Laura-TSE, that employs USEF-
TFGridNet [45] as the discriminative front-end and LauraTSE
as the generative back-end.
A. LauraTSE
In this study, we propose LauraTSE, a target-speaker ex-
traction method based on an auto-regressive (AR) decoder-
only language model built on the LauraGPT [77] backbone.
LauraTSE takes the log-mel spectrogram features of both the
target speaker’s enrollment speech and the mixed speech as
inputs, and employs the residual vector quantization (RVQ)
layers of a neural audio codec to discretize audio repre-
sentations, enabling high-quality modeling and reconstruction
of the target speaker’s speech. The overall architecture of
LauraTSE is illustrated in Fig 2. LauraTSE consists of two key
components. The first is an AR decoder-only language model
that predicts the discrete representations of the target speech
corresponding to the first several codec encoding layers. The
second is a one-step encoder-only language model that jointly
4
r
AR Decoder-only Transformer
bos
m
Log-mel
Conformer
tse
eos
Vocoder
Conformer
Weight
Sharing
sep
𝐸!
Encoder-only Transformer
𝐷#"
Codec
𝐸#
Vocoder
𝐸!
𝐸#
𝐷"
Log-mel
Softmax
Clean
Codec RVQ
𝑠̂
𝐷#"
𝐸&$
Fig. 2. The diagram of LauraTSE network. ‘m’ and ‘r’ denote the mixed speech and reference speech, respectively. We use two weight sharing conformer
to process the mixed and reference speech separately.
exploits information from the mixed and enrollment speech to
directly predict the summed embeddings of all codec layers,
thereby compensating for the limitations of auto-regressive
modeling in modeling long-range temporal dependencies and
mitigating error accumulation. In the following, we provide a
detailed description of LauraTSE’s architecture and design.
1) Encoder: The first stage of LauraTSE is the encoding
stage. Following LauraGPT’s processing strategy for speech
enhancement, we first compute log-mel spectrogram features
for both the enrollment speech and the mixed speech, denoted
as Mm and Mr. These two feature streams are then fed
into a parameter-sharing Conformer [78] encoder, producing
continuous representations for the reference speech and the
mixed speech:
Em = C(Mm)
(1)
Er = C(Mr)
(2)
where Em ∈RN×Lm and Er ∈RN×Lr represent the encoded
outputs of the Mm and Mr, respectively. C(·) denotes the
conformer block. N is the feature dimension. Lm and Lr are
the number of time steps.
This encoding stage serves as a feature adapter within
the overall framework. Rather than directly performing tar-
get speaker extraction, its primary objective is to map raw
acoustic features into a continuous representation space that is
more suitable for subsequent modeling by the auto-regressive
decoder-only language model, thereby providing high-quality
and structured inputs for generative modeling. It is worth
noting that, unlike SpeechX [54], which uses discrete rep-
resentations produced by a neural audio codec as inputs to
the AR model, this work, like LauraGPT [77], preserves task-
driven continuous feature representations. This design choice
avoids potential information loss introduced by discretization,
particularly for fine-grained speaker-related acoustic charac-
teristics.
2) Auto-Regressive Decoder-Only Language Model: The
auto-regressive decoder-only language model is designed to
learn and predict the joint probability distribution of the
coarse-grained discrete representations of the target speech,
conditioned on the enrollment speech and the mixed speech.
Specifically, the model factorizes the joint distribution of the
target speech representations according to the chain rule of
probability as follows:
Pθ(ˆDn | Em, Er) =
Y
i≤T
Pθ(ˆD
(i)
n
| ˆD
(1:i−1)
n
, Em, Er)
(3)
where T denotes the length of the output signal, and θ denotes
the model parameters, and ˆDn denotes the generated discrete
representation of the target speech.
During training, the input sequence to the AR decoder-only
language model is organized as [bos, Er, sep, Em, tse, Dn],
where bos is a learnable beginning-of-sequence token, sep
separates the enrollment and mixed speech embeddings, tse
marks the boundary between conditional inputs and target
outputs, and Dn denotes the sum of embeddings from the first n
residual vector quantization (RVQ) layers of the target speech.
The AR model is trained to predict the discrete representations
of the first n RVQ layers. After generating hidden states,
n parallel linear layers estimate token distributions for each
RVQ layer, and a cross-entropy loss is applied between the
predicted and ground-truth token distributions. The predicted
tokens are then mapped to continuous embeddings using the
codec decoder’s embedding tables and summed across layers
5
r
m
Clean
Discriminative Block
Generative Block
Codec RVQ
𝐷!
𝐷"
𝐺"
Fig. 3. The diagram of discriminative-generative target speaker extraction framework. ‘m’ and ‘r’ denote the mixed speech and reference speech, respectively.
to form a coarse-grained representation ˆDn. During inference,
the model generates ˆDn auto-regressively, frame by frame.
3) Vocoder: The objective of the vocoder module is to
reconstruct a high-fidelity time-domain waveform of the tar-
get speaker by fully leveraging information from the mixed
speech and the enrollment speech, based on the coarse-grained
representations generated by the auto-regressive model. To
this end, we design a vocoder consisting of an encoder-
only language model and a frozen, pre-trained neural audio
codec decoder. The encoder-only language model is built upon
self-attention mechanisms, enabling effective modeling of
long-range temporal dependencies and capturing fine-grained
acoustic structures and speech details. Unlike SpeechX [54],
which predicts RVQ codes layer-wise, our design adopts a
one-step encoder-only language model that directly predicts
the summed embeddings across all RVQ layers of the target
speech. This formulation substantially simplifies the modeling
process while improving both training and inference efficiency.
Specifically, the input to the encoder-only language model
is the concatenated feature sequence [Er, Em, ˆDn]:
[ ·, ·, ˆEs] = EL([Er, Em, ˆDn])
(4)
where Er and Em denote the continuous embeddings of the
enrollment speech and the mixed speech, respectively, and ˆDn
represents the embedding corresponding to the coarse-grained
target speech representation generated by the first-stage AR
decoder-only language model. EL(·) denotes the encoder-
only language model. The encoder-only model processes this
sequence and outputs [ ·, ·, ˆEs], where ˆEs denotes the predicted
fine-grained acoustic embedding of the target speaker. During
training, the predicted embedding ˆEs is supervised against
the ground-truth target speech embedding Es, obtained from
the neural audio codec as the sum of embeddings across all
RVQ layers. Both L1 and L2 losses are jointly employed to
optimize reconstruction accuracy and training stability. Finally,
the frozen codec decoder converts the predicted embedding ˆEs
into the time-domain waveform of the target speaker’s speech.
It is worth emphasizing that the AR decoder-only language
model and the encoder-only language model are jointly trained
end-to-end.
B. Architecture
To leverage the advantages of both discriminative and gen-
erative approaches simultaneously, this work proposes a two-
stage discriminative–generative framework for target speaker
extraction. As illustrated in Fig. 3, the framework consists
of two collaborative modules: a discriminative module and
a generative module. The discriminative module explicitly ex-
tracts target-speaker–related speech components or intermedi-
ate acoustic representations from the mixed speech, providing
high-quality and low-interference conditional inputs for the
subsequent generative module. The generative module then
performs generative reconstruction based on the outputs of
the discriminative module, further enhancing the perceptual
quality of the target speech.
In the discriminative module, the discriminative block takes
the reference speech r and the mixed speech m as inputs, and
extracts target-related information by suppressing interference
from non-target speakers. This module outputs a coarse target
representation Do, which can be interpreted as an estimated
target speech signal or an intermediate acoustic representation:
Do = D(m, r)
(5)
where D(·) denotes the discriminative extraction function.
In parallel, the ground-truth clean target speech is encoded
by a neural audio codec with RVQ, producing a coarse discrete
representation Dn:
Dn = Q(s)
(6)
where s denotes the clean target speech and Q(·) represents
the codec encoder.
In the generative module, the generative block takes the
discriminative output Do as a conditional input and leverages
6
LauraTSE
𝐷!
Encoder
TF-GridNet
blocks
Fusion
Encoder
CMHA
Decoder
m
r
𝐷!
𝐷"
Q
K,V
𝐷#$%
𝐷&
𝐷'
𝐺"
Codec RVQ
s
Generative Block
Discriminative Block
Fig. 4. The diagram of USEF-Laura-TSE. ‘m’ and ‘r’ denote the mixed speech and reference speech, respectively.
generative modeling to reconstruct a refined target speech rep-
resentation. During training, the generative block is supervised
using the codec representation Do, and the final output Go is
generated as:
Go = G(Do, Dn)
(7)
where G(·) denotes the generative reconstruction function. At
inference time, only Do is required, and the generative block
produces the enhanced target speech output Go.
Through this two-stage design, the discriminative block
provides a low-interference and well-aligned target represen-
tation. In contrast, the generative block further refines speech
details and improves perceptual quality via distribution-level
modeling.
C. USEF-Laura-TSE
To validate the effectiveness of the proposed framework, we
construct a two-stage discriminative–generative target speaker
extraction network, termed USEF-Laura-TSE, that employs
USEF-TFGridNet [45] as the discriminative front-end and
LauraTSE as the generative back-end. The overall architecture
of LauraTSE is illustrated in Fig 4.
1) Discriminative Block (USEF-TFGridNet): Given the ref-
erence speech r and the mixed speech m, both signals are
first transformed into the time–frequency (T–F) domain using
the short-time Fourier transform (STFT), followed by 2-D
convolutional encoders:
Dm = Enc(m)
(8)
Dr = Enc(r)
(9)
where Enc(·) denotes the shared encoder composed of STFT
and 2-D convolution layers.
Dm and Dr are fed into the CMHA module, where a cross
multi-head attention mechanism is applied to extract frame-
level features of the target speaker:
Dspk = CMHA(q = Dm; k, v = Dr)
(10)
where Em and Er represent the encoder outputs of the mixed
speech and reference speech, respectively. The Cross Multi-
Head Attention operation is denoted as CMHA(·), and Espk
is the output of the CMHA module. The CMHA module in
USEF-TFGridNet [45] uses mixed speech encoding as the
query. This approach produces a frame-level feature with the
same length as Dm, allowing the mixed and reference speech
lengths to differ in the USEF-TFGridNet [45].
The extracted speaker-aware representation Dspk is then
fused by direct concatenation with the mixed-speech features:
Df = Concat(Dm, Dspk)
(11)
The fused features are processed by a stack of TF-GridNet
blocks to model global T–F dependencies. Finally, a decoder
composed of 2-D transposed convolutions and inverse STFT
(iSTFT) reconstructs the discriminative output Do.
2) Generative Block (LauraTSE): The output of the dis-
criminative block Do is fed into the generative block as a
conditional input. During training, the clean target speech s
is encoded by a neural audio codec with RVQ to obtain a
coarse discrete representation Dn. LauraTSE learns to model
the conditional distribution of the target speech and generates
the final output Go. The detailed procedure of LauraTSE is
described in Section III-A
IV. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
A. Datasets
The main experiments in this work are conducted using
the 460-hour clean speech subset of the LibriSpeech [79]
corpus, referred to as LibriSpeech-460h. The training data
7
are generated using an online mixing strategy, where speech
samples are randomly selected and mixed during training.
The relative signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is randomly sampled
from 0 to 5 dB to simulate realistic target-speaker extraction
scenarios.
For validation, the clean development set of Libri2Mix [80]
is used. During both training and evaluation, the enroll-
ment speech is randomly cropped to 5 seconds to improve
robustness to variations in enrollment duration. In the test
phase, the clean test set of Libri2Mix is used for evaluation,
where an enrollment utterance is randomly selected for each
target speaker, thereby more closely reflecting practical target-
speaker extraction conditions.
It should be noted that LauraTSE is first pre-trained on
LibriSpeech-460h to learn robust speech and speaker represen-
tations from large-scale clean speech data. The model is then
fine-tuned on the Libri2Mix clean training set to better adapt to
the mixed-speech conditions of the target speaker extraction
task. For the LauraTSE ablation studies, to ensure fair and
controlled comparisons, the model is trained exclusively on
the Libri2Mix clean training set.
B. Network Configuration
1) LauraTSE: For LauraTSE, we adopt LauraGPT [77]
as the backbone of the AR decoder-only language model
and employ FunCodec [76] as the neural audio codec. In
LauraTSE, the AR model predicts n = 2 codec output layers,
i.e., only the first two RVQ layers are modeled, resulting in
a coarse-grained representation of the target speech. In the
feature encoding stage, both the enrollment speech and the
mixed speech are analyzed using a window length of 512
samples and a frame shift of 256 samples. The extracted
features are then processed by a shared Conformer encoder
consisting of six Conformer layers, each with eight attention
heads and a hidden dimension of 512, to obtain continuous
acoustic representations with rich contextual information. In
the generative module, the AR decoder-only Transformer
comprises 10 Transformer blocks, each with eight attention
heads and a hidden dimension of 512. Conditioned on the
encoded representations of the enrollment and mixed speech,
the AR model predicts the discrete codec representations
corresponding to the first n RVQ layers of the target speech
in an auto-regressive, frame-by-frame manner. For waveform
reconstruction, an encoder-only Transformer is employed as
a refinement module to recover fine-grained acoustic details
from the coarse-grained AR outputs. This network consists
of six Transformer layers, with eight attention heads and a
hidden dimension of 512. Through self-attention mechanisms,
the encoder-only Transformer jointly fuses information from
the mixed speech, the enrollment speech, and the AR-predicted
codec representations, and directly estimates the complete
RVQ representation of the target speech, enabling high-fidelity
waveform reconstruction.
2) USEF-LauraTSE:
USEF-LauraTSE
employs
USEF-
TFGridNet [45] as the discriminative front-end. In the encoder,
the STFT is computed with a 20 ms window length and a
10 ms frame shift, using a 128-point FFT, producing 161-
dimensional complex-valued STFT features per frame. These
features are processed by 2-D convolutional layers with a ker-
nel size of 3×3 and a stride of 1, with two input and 128 output
channels. The cross-head attention module uses a single-layer
cross-attention structure with four parallel attention heads and
a feed-forward network (FFN) with a hidden dimension of 512.
In both the full-band and sub-band modules, bidirectional long
short-term memory (BLSTM) networks with 256 hidden units
are employed as sequence modeling components to capture
contextual dependencies along the temporal and frequency
dimensions, respectively. Subsequently, a cross-frame self-
attention module with a single attention layer, four attention
heads, and a 512-dimensional FFN is applied to model global
correlations across time–frequency units. The number of TF-
GridNet blocks in the separator is set to 2 and 6 for the USEF-
TFGridNet-S and USEF-TFGridNet-L configurations, respec-
tively. In the decoder, 2-D transposed convolutional layers are
used to reduce the feature channel dimension from 256 to 2,
with kernel sizes and strides mirroring those of the encoder
convolutional layers. The decoder outputs a complex time–
frequency spectrum estimate of the target speaker’s speech,
which is subsequently transformed back into the time domain.
C. Training Details
In the proposed discriminative–generative two-stage target
speaker extraction framework, a stage-wise training strategy
is adopted. The first stage corresponds to the discriminative
front-end based on the USEF-TFGridNet [45]. This stage
is first pre-trained independently on the Libri2Mix dataset
to obtain stable and discriminative target speaker representa-
tions, as well as preliminary speech reconstruction capability.
After pre-training, several training strategies are explored
when jointly training with the generative module:(1) Freezing
the discriminative module parameters and training only the
generative module, in order to preserve the stability of the
discriminative front-end. (2) Unfreezing the discriminative
module parameters and performing end-to-end joint training
further to enhance the collaborative modeling between the two
modules. (3) Introducing an additional Scale-Invariant Signal-
to-Distortion Ratio (SI-SDR) [81] loss at the output of the
discriminative module to regularize its reconstruction quality
during joint training.The SI-SDR loss is defined as follows:





sT = <ˆs,s>s
||s||2
sE = ˆs −sT
SI-SDR = −10 lg ||sT||2
||sE||2
(12)
where ˆs ∈R1×T represents the estimated target speaker speech,
while s ∈R1×T represents the clean source speech. < s, s >
denotes the power of the signal s.
The back-end corresponds to the generative module, which
uses LauraTSE, an auto-regressive decoder-only language
model, as its backbone. Unlike the discriminative module,
LauraTSE is trained from scratch without relying on any
pre-trained weights. The total number of model parameters
is approximately 77M, of which 36M are allocated to the
decoder-only Transformer. In contrast, the remaining parame-
ters primarily come from the continuous feature encoder and
8
the vocoder-related modules. During training, the Adam [82]
optimizer is used with an initial learning rate of 1 × 10−3.
To stabilize the training of the large-scale generative model, a
10,000-step warm-up learning rate schedule is applied. When
validation performance does not improve for three consecutive
epochs, the learning rate is halved. The total number of
training epochs is set to 100.
D. Evaluation Metrics
Because vocoder-based waveform generation may introduce
deviations in temporal alignment and phase details relative to
the original clean speech, traditional intrusive speech quality
metrics that rely on a reference signal may fail to reflect per-
ceived quality when evaluating generative models accurately.
Therefore, in this work, intrusive metrics such as PESQ [83]
and STOI [84] are not adopted. Instead, we primarily employ
the following evaluation metrics that are more suitable for
generative speech modeling, most of which are non-intrusive:
• DNSMOS [85]: A non-intrusive objective speech quality
metric that outputs three scores ranging from 1 to 5,
including SIG (speech signal quality), BAK (background
noise suppression), and OVRL (overall perceptual qual-
ity). DNSMOS has been shown to correlate well with
human subjective judgments.
• NISQA [86]: Another non-intrusive speech quality as-
sessment metric that predicts an overall perceptual quality
score (1–5). It exhibits high correlation with subjective
listening tests across diverse real-world scenarios.
• SpeechBERT [87]: A semantic similarity metric inspired
by BERTScore, operating in a self-supervised speech
representation space. It measures semantic consistency
between the generated speech and the target speech.
In this work, speech features are extracted using the
HuBERT-base [88] model.
• Differential Word Error Rate (dWER) [89]: An
intelligibility-oriented metric that computes the difference
in word error rate between the generated speech and the
ground-truth speech using an automatic speech recogni-
tion system. It reflects both intelligibility and semantic
fidelity. We employ the base version of Whisper [90] for
evaluation.
• Speaker Similarity: This metric evaluates speaker iden-
tity preservation by computing the cosine similarity be-
tween the generated speech and the ground-truth target
speech in a high-dimensional speaker embedding space.
Two speaker verification models are used: WavLM-base1
and the ResNet 221LM model from WeSpeaker [91].
V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
This section presents a systematic experimental evalua-
tion of the proposed discriminative-generative two-stage TSE
framework. Experiments are primarily conducted on the Lib-
riMix dataset, with performance assessed from multiple per-
spectives, including speech quality, semantic consistency, and
speaker similarity. To better understand the respective roles
1https://huggingface.co/microsoft/wavlm-base-plus-sv
Libri2Mix-212h
LibriSpeech-460h-dm
LibriSpeech-960h-dm
9
11
13
15
17
19
21
23
dWER (%)
24.1
15.9 (-8.2)
15.1 (-0.8)
20.9
9.65
14.8 (-6.1)
7.47 (-2.18)
LauraTSE (77M)
Spex+ (11M)
USEF-TSE (16M)
Fig. 5.
dWER versus training data scale across models. Annotations ”(-
X)” denote relative dWER reduction (percentage points) compared to the
preceding smaller dataset.
and advantages of different modeling paradigms in TSE, the
experimental analysis is organized into two parts. First, we
evaluate the generative model LauraTSE on the LibriMix
dataset, with a particular focus on examining the model-
ing capacity, strengths, and limitations of the auto-regressive
decoder-only generative paradigm for the TSE task. Subse-
quently, we assess the proposed discriminative–generative two-
stage system, USEF-LauraTSE, and investigate how the intro-
duction of a discriminative front-end improves the stability,
robustness, and overall performance of the generative model.
A. Ablation Results of LauraTSE
1) Data Scalability of LauraTSE: To evaluate the scalabil-
ity of LauraTSE with respect to training data size, we compare
it with two representative discriminative TSE models, namely
SpEx+ [36] and USEF-TSE (USEF-TFGridNet-L) [45]. The
parameter sizes of SpEx+ and USEF-TFGridNet-L are ap-
proximately 11 M and 16 M, respectively, whereas LauraTSE
contains approximately 77 M parameters. In this experiment,
LauraTSE is trained using three progressively larger training
datasets: (1) Libri2Mix-212h, derived from the Libri2Mix-
clean subset and consisting of approximately 212 hours of
clean mixed speech; (2) LibriSpeech-460h-dm, constructed
from the LibriSpeech-460h subset using a dynamic mixing
strategy; and (3) LibriSpeech-960h-dm, generated from the full
960-hour LibriSpeech dataset, also using dynamic mixing.
The experimental results are presented in Fig. 5. As shown,
when the training data are expanded from Libri2Mix to Lib-
riSpeech, the performance of the discriminative model USEF-
TSE [45] remains relatively stable, indicating limited sensi-
tivity to training data scale. In contrast, both SpEx+ [36] and
LauraTSE exhibit pronounced performance improvements as
the amount of training data increases. In particular, LauraTSE
achieves an absolute reduction of 8.2% in dWER, which
is notably larger than the 6.1% improvement observed for
SpEx+ [36]. These results indicate that LauraTSE benefits
more substantially from large-scale training data, highlighting
its superior scalability and data efficiency. This observation
9
Fig. 6.
Decoder-Encoder Joint vs. Split. Decoder-Encoder-join denotes the
proposed LauraTSE model where Decoder and Encoder are trained together
by Cross-Entropy Loss and MSE Loss. In Decoder-Encoder-split, the Decoder
and Encoder is trained separately.
Decoder-Encoder-joint
Decoder-Encoder-split
Decoder-only LM
𝐷"!
Encoder-only LM
𝐿"#
𝐸%$
𝐿%&#
𝐿
=
+
𝐷!
STE
𝐸'
𝐸'
𝐸(
Ref
Mix
Conformer
𝐸(
Decoder-only LM
𝐷!
𝐸'
𝐸(
Ref
Mix
Conformer
𝐿"#
𝐷"!
Encoder-only LM
𝐷!
𝐸'
𝐸(
Ref
Mix
Conformer
𝐿%&#
𝐸%$
further suggests that auto-regressive generative models can
better exploit increased data diversity when sufficient training
data are available.
Notably, when the training data are increased from 460 to
960 hours, LauraTSE’s performance gains become relatively
marginal. This phenomenon may be attributed to two factors.
First, data quality may play an important role: the LibriSpeech-
960h corpus contains a large proportion of utterances from
the train-other-500 subset, which involves more challenging
acoustic conditions and higher noise levels, potentially off-
setting the benefits of increased data quantity. Second, model
capacity may constitute a limiting factor, as the current scale
of LauraTSE may be insufficient to leverage the additional
information provided by substantially larger datasets fully.
Moreover, even with increased training data, LauraTSE
does not consistently outperform USEF-TSE [45] on semantic
consistency metrics. This observation raises an important
open question: can generative models comprehensively sur-
pass well-established discriminative approaches in terms of
semantic consistency for the target speaker extraction task?
Addressing this question represents a promising direction for
future research.
2) Impact Analysis of the Encoder-Only Language Model
on LauraTSE: Ideally, a generative TSE system would rely
solely on a decoder-only language model without introduc-
ing an additional encoder-only module. However, due to
the limited capacity of a single-layer neural audio codec
to simultaneously preserve fine-grained speech details and
multi-layer acoustic information, the coarse discrete represen-
tations generated by a decoder-only language model alone
are often insufficient for high-quality speech reconstruction.
To address this limitation, the LauraTSE framework incor-
porates an encoder-only language model to refine the coarse
representations produced by the decoder-only language model
into high-resolution continuous acoustic embeddings. This
subsection systematically investigates the role of the encoder-
only language model in LauraTSE.
We first examine whether joint optimization of the decoder-
only and encoder-only language models is necessary. Al-
TABLE I
EVALUATION RESULTS FOR DIFFERENT DECODER-ENCODER
CONFIGURATIONS. Decoder-Encoder-joint AND Decoder-Encoder-split
REFER TO THE TWO INTEGRATION STRATEGIES ILLUSTRATED IN
FIGURE 6. Target-n DENOTES THE RECONSTRUCTED TARGET CLEAN
AUDIO USING ONLY THE FIRST n LAYERS OF THE CODEC. No-Encoder
USES SUMMATION OF ONLY THE FIRST n LAYERS OF THE DECODER-ONLY
LM OUTPUT TO GENERATE SPEECH WITHOUT THE ENCODER.
Model
NISQA ↑
dWER ↓
WeSpeaker Sim ↑
Decoder-Encoder-joint
4.241
0.241
0.847
Decoder-Encoder-split
4.253
0.232
0.858
Target-n (n = 2)
3.644
0.301
0.740
No-Encoder
3.807
0.579
0.709
TABLE II
INPUT COMPOSITION RESULTS FOR THE ENCODER-ONLY LM.
Model
Input
NISQA↑
dWER ↓
WeSpeaker
Er
Em
Dn
Sim↑
Encoder-All
✓
✓
✓
4.241
0.241
0.847
Encoder-Mix
✗
✓
✓
4.173
0.239
0.842
Encoder-Ref
✓
✗
✓
4.187
0.480
0.763
though the two modules are architecturally coupled, their
learning objectives differ substantially: the decoder-only lan-
guage model focuses on auto-regressive sequence modeling,
whereas the encoder-only language model emphasizes recon-
struction and refinement of continuous acoustic representa-
tions. Accordingly, we consider two training strategies, as
illustrated in Fig. 6: (1) Decoder–Encoder-joint, which follows
the original LauraTSE training scheme, where both modules
are jointly optimized end-to-end using the straight-through
estimator (STE) [92] to enable gradient propagation through
the softmax-based discretization; and (2) Decoder–Encoder-
split, where the decoder-only language model and the encoder-
only language model are trained separately, with the latter
optimized using fixed outputs from the former. As reported
in Table I, the split training strategy yields slightly better
overall performance than joint training. This result suggests
that, under the current configuration, strict end-to-end joint
optimization between the decoder-only and encoder-only lan-
guage models is not essential.
We further analyze the contribution of different input
sources to the encoder-only language model. In the original
LauraTSE framework, the encoder-only language model takes
feature representations from both the mixed speech and the
enrollment speech as inputs. To isolate the effect of each input,
we construct three variants: (1) Encoder-All, which uses both
mixed speech and enrollment speech representations (original
setting); (2) Encoder-Mix, which uses only the mixed speech
representation; and (3) Encoder-Ref, which uses only the en-
rollment speech representation. The corresponding results are
summarized in Table II. It can be observed that Encoder-Mix
achieves performance comparable to Encoder-All, whereas
Encoder-Ref suffers from a pronounced performance degra-
dation. These results indicate that the mixed speech represen-
tation provides indispensable information for the encoder-only
language model, while the enrollment speech plays a relatively
10
TABLE III
ABLATION STUDIES OF LAURATSE. n- DENOTES THE OUTPUT LAYER NUMBER OF THE DECODER-ONLY LM. THE Ref output FORMATS THE OUTPUT OF
THE DECODER-ONLY LM TO CONTAIN BOTH THE CLEAN AND REFERENCE SPEECH. Discrete IO USES DISCRETE CODEC EMBEDDINGS RATHER THAN
CONTINUOUS FEATURES AS THE INPUT FEATURES. FOR WavLM input, THE WAVLM [53] EMBEDDINGS ARE UTILIZED AS THE INPUT FEATURES.
Model
DNSMOS ↑
NISQA ↑
SpeechBERT ↑
dWER ↓
WavLM Sim ↑
Wespeaker Sim ↑
SIG
BAK
OVL
Base (n-2)
3.626
4.102
3.360
4.241
0.880
0.241
0.965
0.847
n-1
3.604
4.100
3.339
4.201
0.861
0.266
0.958
0.830
n-3
3.618
4.095
3.350
4.270
0.880
0.235
0.967
0.853
Ref output
3.588
4.071
3.318
4.182
0.859
0.237
0.962
0.851
Discrete IO
3.562
4.035
3.268
3.940
0.810
0.421
0.952
0.835
WavLM input
3.507
3.951
3.137
3.220
0.792
0.447
0.860
0.633
limited role at this stage. This finding further suggests that
the encoder-only language model does not merely serve as a
post-processing vocoder, but also continues to participate in
task-related modeling for target-speaker extraction.
3) Comparison Results of the Decoder-Only Language
Model: Table III summarizes the ablation results under differ-
ent input and output configurations of the decoder-only lan-
guage model. Base denotes the proposed LauraTSE baseline,
while n- indicates the number of RVQ layers predicted by
the auto-regressive decoder-only language model. Varying n
from 1 to 3 yields only marginal performance differences,
suggesting that predicting a small number of coarse-grained
RVQ layers is sufficient for the target-speaker extraction task.
To investigate whether strict length alignment between
the conditional input and the generated output is neces-
sary, we reformulate the decoder-only input sequence as
[bos, Er, Em, tse] and require the model to generate an output
sequence containing both the enrollment and the enhanced
speech, referred to as Ref output. During inference, only
the segment corresponding to the mixed speech is retained.
This variant achieves performance comparable to the original
setting, indicating that strict input–output length alignment is
not required and that the decoder-only language model can
focus solely on generating the clean target speech.
Inspired by SpeechX [54], we further evaluate a discrete-
input variant (Discrete IO), in which continuous log-mel fea-
tures are replaced with discrete RVQ codebook indices. This
configuration consistently performs worse than the continuous-
feature baseline, likely due to information loss from discretiza-
tion and a mismatch between codec representations trained on
clean speech and the mixed-speech inputs encountered during
target speaker extraction.
Finally, we examine the use of WavLM [53] features as
model inputs (WavLM input). Consistent with previous obser-
vations, this variant exhibits degraded speaker similarity per-
formance, which may be attributed to the reduced preservation
of speaker-related acoustic characteristics in the discretized
representations.
B. Ablation Results of USEF-LauraTSE
This subsection presents a systematic analysis of the pro-
posed discriminative–generative two-stage target speaker ex-
traction model, USEF-LauraTSE, evaluated on the Libri2Mix
dataset. The analysis focuses on three aspects: (1) the impact
of the discriminative front-end on overall system performance;
(2) the behavior of both the discriminative front-end and
the generative back-end when an additional SI-SDR loss is
imposed on the front-end outputs; and (3) the performance
differences between auto-regressive and non-auto-regressive
inference strategies under identical training conditions.
1) Impact Analysis of the Discriminative Front-End: To
investigate the effect of introducing a discriminative front-end
prior to the generative model, we consider two training strate-
gies: (i) a frozen setting, where the pre-trained discriminative
front-end is kept fixed and used solely as a feature extractor;
and (ii) an unfrozen setting, where the discriminative front-
end is jointly optimized together with the generative back-
end. Table IV reports the test results on Libri2Mix for the
purely discriminative model (USEF-TFGridNet-S), the purely
generative model (LauraTSE), and the proposed two-stage
model (USEF-LauraTSE-S).
A comparison between the purely generative model Lau-
raTSE and the two-stage model USEF-LauraTSE-S shows that
introducing a discriminative front-end consistently improves
performance across multiple evaluation metrics. Under the
Libri2Mix training configuration, USEF-LauraTSE-S achieves
comparable or improved speech quality (DNSMOS-OVRL:
3.336 →3.341), semantic consistency (SpeechBERT: 0.908
→0.910), and speaker similarity (WavLM similarity: 0.974
→0.973), while further reducing the dWER (0.159 →0.153).
These results indicate that the discriminative front-end pro-
vides more structured and interference-suppressed interme-
diate representations, thereby easing the semantic modeling
burden and speaker preservation requirements of the generative
back-end.
Further comparison between frozen and unfrozen training
strategies reveals that freezing the discriminative front-end
is suboptimal. Although the frozen configuration still out-
performs the purely generative model, it exhibits noticeable
degradation in semantic-related metrics, such as SpeechBERT
(0.869) and dWER (0.266), compared with the unfrozen
setting (SpeechBERT: 0.910, dWER: 0.153). This observation
suggests that joint optimization enables effective feedback
from the generative back-end to the discriminative front-end,
guiding it toward intermediate representations that are more
amenable to generative modeling.
When joint training is conducted on a larger-scale dataset
(Training Data = 2) with the discriminative front-end unfrozen,
11
TABLE IV
RESULTS OF THE DISCRIMINATIVE–GENERATIVE MODELS ON THE LIBRI2MIX CLEAN TEST SET. IN THE “CATEGORY” COLUMN, “D” DENOTES A
DISCRIMINATIVE MODEL, “G” DENOTES A GENERATIVE MODEL, AND “D–G” DENOTES A DISCRIMINATIVE–GENERATIVE MODEL. IN THE “TRAINING
DATA” COLUMN, “1” INDICATES TRAINING ON LIBRIMIX, WHILE “2” DENOTES TRAINING WITH ONLINE MIXING ON LIBRISPEECH FOLLOWED BY
FINE-TUNING ON LIBRI2MIX. USEF-TFGRIDNET-S REFERS TO THE USEF-TFGRIDNET MODEL WITH TWO TF-GRIDNET BLOCKS, AND
USEF-LAURA-TSE-S DENOTES THE DISCRIMINATIVE–GENERATIVE MODEL THAT EMPLOYS USEF-TFGRIDNET-S AS THE DISCRIMINATIVE
FRONT-END AND LAURATSE AS THE GENERATIVE BACK-END.“SBERT” DENOTES SPEECHBERT SCORE.
Model
Category
Frozen
Training
Data
DNSMOS ↑
NISQA ↑
SBERT ↑
dWER ↓
WavLM ↑
Wespeaker ↑
SIG
BAK
OVRL
USEF-TFGridNet-S
D
-
1
3.308
3.745
2.926
3.349
0.807
0.228
0.961
0.912
LauraTSE
G
-
1
3.629
4.102
3.360
4.241
0.879
0.241
0.965
0.847
2
3.609
4.084
3.336
4.333
0.908
0.159
0.974
0.876
USEF-Laura-TSE-S
D-G
✓
1
3.606
4.100
3.344
4.304
0.869
0.266
0.963
0.851
✗
1
3.609
4.086
3.341
4.350
0.910
0.153
0.973
0.879
✗
2
3.592
4.061
3.313
4.453
0.925
0.120
0.978
0.895
USEF-LauraTSE-S achieves the best overall performance
across nearly all evaluation metrics. Specifically, the dWER is
further reduced to 0.120, SpeechBERT improves to 0.925, and
speaker similarity reaches its highest levels (WavLM: 0.978,
WeSpeaker: 0.895). In contrast, while the purely discriminative
model USEF-TFGridNet-S remains competitive in terms of
dWER (0.228) and speaker similarity (0.961 / 0.912), it lags
behind both generative and discriminative-generative models
in perceptual speech quality metrics, such as DNSMOS-OVRL
(2.926) and NISQA (3.349).
This performance gap can be attributed to two factors. First,
the discriminative front-end employs only two TF-GridNet
blocks, which constrains its modeling capacity. Second, dis-
criminative approaches are more prone to over-suppression
and signal distortion, whereas generative models offer inherent
advantages for reconstructing natural, perceptually pleasing
speech. By integrating these complementary strengths, the
proposed discriminative-generative framework effectively bal-
ances robust target localization and interference suppression
with high-quality speech reconstruction.
2) Bidirectional Interaction Between the Discriminative
and Generative Modules:
Previous experiments primarily
evaluate the discriminative-generative framework from the
perspective of its generative outputs. In this subsection, we
shift the focus to the discriminative module’s outputs to inves-
tigate the bidirectional interaction between the discriminative
front-end and the generative back-end. The corresponding
experimental results are summarized in Table V.
We first compare the standalone discriminative and gener-
ative models under the Training Data = 2 setting. As shown
in the first three rows of Table V, the discriminative model
USEF-TFGridNet-L achieves strong overall performance, with
a DNSMOS-OVRL score of 3.272, a NISQA score of 4.319,
a low dWER of 0.075, and speaker similarity scores ex-
ceeding 0.98 for both WavLM and WeSpeaker. In contrast,
the purely generative model LauraTSE slightly outperforms
USEF-TFGridNet-L in perceptual quality metrics (DNSMOS-
OVRL: 3.336; NISQA: 4.333), but exhibits inferior seman-
tic consistency and speaker preservation, as reflected by a
higher dWER (0.159) and a lower WeSpeaker score (0.876).
A similar trend is observed for USEF-TFGridNet-S, where
the discriminative model maintains advantages in dWER and
speaker similarity, while lagging behind the generative model
in perceptual quality.
For USEF-LauraTSE-S without an additional SI-SDR con-
straint (”SI-SDR = No, O = G”), the discriminative front-
end degrades noticeably during joint training. This behavior
indicates that the front-end no longer prioritizes the perceptual
quality of its own outputs. Instead, it adapts to produce
intermediate representations that are more favorable for the
generative back-end. Despite the degraded discriminative out-
put, the generative output of USEF-LauraTSE-S consistently
outperforms the standalone LauraTSE across multiple metrics,
including NISQA (4.453 vs. 4.333), SpeechBERT (0.925
vs. 0.908), dWER (0.120 vs. 0.159), and speaker similarity
(WavLM: 0.978 vs. 0.974; WeSpeaker: 0.895 vs. 0.876). These
results suggest that even a weakened discriminative front-
end can still provide sufficient target alignment and coarse
separation, enabling the generative back-end to exploit its
strong reconstruction capability.
To prevent excessive degradation of the discriminative front-
end, an SI-SDR loss is introduced to constrain its outputs
explicitly. With this constraint (”SI-SDR = Yes”), the discrimi-
native output of USEF-LauraTSE-S (”O = D”) shows substan-
tial improvements in semantic-related metrics compared with
the pre-trained USEF-TFGridNet-S, with dWER reduced from
0.228 to 0.113, WavLM increased from 0.961 to 0.977, and
WeSpeaker improved from 0.912 to 0.937. DNSMOS-OVRL
increases slightly, while NISQA decreases to some extent,
indicating that the discriminative front-end sacrifices a small
amount of perceptual quality in exchange for more structured
and semantically reliable representations. Correspondingly, the
generative output exhibits a modest degradation in NISQA
(4.416 vs. 4.453), an increase in dWER (0.120 →0.154), and a
slight decrease in speaker similarity, suggesting that a stronger
discriminative constraint limits the flexibility of the generative
model in adjusting fine-grained waveform details.
A similar pattern is observed for USEF-LauraTSE-L. Com-
pared with the standalone USEF-TFGridNet-L, the discrim-
inative output after joint training shows a marginal increase
in dWER (0.075 →0.076), accompanied by decreases in
DNSMOS-OVRL and NISQA. It indicates that, under the
discriminative–generative objective, a stronger discriminative
front-end does not over-optimize its own perceptual quality,
but instead produces intermediate representations that are
easier for the generative back-end to reconstruct. In con-
12
TABLE V
RESULTS ON THE LIBRI2MIX CLEAN TEST SET FOR THE DISCRIMINATIVE–GENERATIVE MODELS WITH AN ADDITIONAL SI-SDR LOSS. IN THE “O”
COLUMN, “D” DENOTES THE OUTPUT OF THE DISCRIMINATIVE MODEL, AND “G” DENOTES THE OUTPUT OF THE GENERATIVE MODEL. IN THE
“MODEL” COLUMN, USEF-LAURA-TSE-S REFERS TO THE DISCRIMINATIVE–GENERATIVE SYSTEM THAT USES USEF-TFGRIDNET-S AS THE
DISCRIMINATIVE FRONT-END AND LAURATSE AS THE GENERATIVE BACK-END, WHILE USEF-LAURA-TSE-L EMPLOYS USEF-TFGRIDNET-L (WITH
SIX TF-GRIDNET BLOCKS) AS THE DISCRIMINATIVE FRONT-END AND LAURATSE AS THE GENERATIVE BACK-END. FOR ALL USEF-LAURA-TSE
VARIANTS, THE DISCRIMINATIVE FRONT-END IS PRE-TRAINED ONLY ON LIBRI2MIX. IN THE “TRAINING DATA” COLUMN, “1” INDICATES TRAINING ON
LIBRIMIX, AND “2” DENOTES TRAINING WITH ONLINE MIXING ON LIBRISPEECH FOLLOWED BY FINE-TUNING ON LIBRI2MIX. “SBERT” DENOTES THE
SPEECHBERT SCORE.
Model
Training
Data
SI-SDR
Loss?
O
DNSMOS
NISQA
SBERT
dWER
WavLM
Wespeaker
SIG
BAK
OVRL
USEF-TFGridNet-L
1
-
D
3.514
4.041
3.249
4.370
0.909
0.104
0.982
0.953
USEF-TFGridNet-L
2
-
D
3.555
4.051
3.272
4.319
0.935
0.075
0.988
0.968
LauraTSE
2
-
G
3.609
4.066
3.336
4.333
0.908
0.159
0.974
0.876
USEF-Laura-TSE-S
2
No
D
1.187
1.144
1.100
1.014
0.451
0.693
0.672
0.642
2
No
G
3.592
4.061
3.313
4.453
0.925
0.120
0.978
0.895
2
Yes
D
3.422
3.661
2.979
3.172
0.884
0.113
0.977
0.937
2
Yes
G
3.603
4.080
3.329
4.416
0.915
0.154
0.975
0.880
USEF-Laura-TSE-L
2
Yes
D
3.528
3.955
3.202
3.648
0.933
0.076
0.987
0.950
2
Yes
G
3.592
4.075
3.319
4.450
0.934
0.117
0.982
0.902
trast, the generative output of USEF-LauraTSE-L significantly
outperforms the standalone LauraTSE, with improvements in
NISQA (4.450 vs. 4.333), SpeechBERT (0.934 vs. 0.908),
dWER (0.117 vs. 0.159), and speaker similarity metrics.
Compared with the smaller front-end configuration, the larger
discriminative front-end further reduces dWER and improves
speaker consistency, demonstrating that increased discrimina-
tive capacity provides higher-quality structural information for
generative reconstruction.
Overall, these results reveal a fundamental trade-off in
discriminative–generative TSE frameworks. Without an SI-
SDR constraint, the generative model can fully exploit its
distribution modeling capability and exhibits strong robustness
to imperfections in the discriminative front-end. Introducing
SI-SDR loss substantially strengthens the discriminative mod-
ule but partially constrains the generative model’s flexibility,
resulting in reduced gains in perceptual quality. These findings
highlight the importance of carefully balancing front-end con-
trollability and back-end generative freedom when designing
training strategies for discriminative–generative target speaker
extraction systems.
3) Auto-Regressive
and
Non-Auto-Regressive
Inference
Strategies: Under identical training conditions, the proposed
discriminative-generative framework supports two inference
modes at test time: auto-regressive (AR) and non-auto-
regressive (NAR). In the standard setting, the decoder-only
language model generates discrete target speech representa-
tions in an auto-regressive, frame-by-frame manner. Within
the discriminative–generative architecture, an alternative NAR
inference strategy can be adopted by leveraging the outputs of
the discriminative front-end as pseudo labels for the generative
model. Specifically, in the NAR inference mode, the training
procedure remains unchanged. At inference time, the target
speech representations produced by the discriminative front-
end are used as pseudo-labels and injected into the decoder-
only language model’s decoding sequence, along with the
mixed and enrollment speech representations. By controlling
the pseudo-label injection ratio R, the inference process can be
flexibly adjusted between fully generative decoding (R = 0)
and firm reliance on the discriminative front-end estimates
(R = 1). A smaller R preserves more generative flexibility,
whereas a larger R emphasizes the robustness and controllabil-
ity of the discriminative front-end. Comparative experiments
are conducted on four configurations: USEF-LauraTSE-S with
a frozen front-end, USEF-LauraTSE-S with an additional
SI-SDR loss, a decoupled-training discriminative–generative
model, and USEF-LauraTSE-S with SI-SDR loss under de-
coupled training. The results are reported in Table VI.
As shown in Table VI, the proposed two-stage framework
exhibits consistent trends under AR and NAR inference.
Taking USEF-LauraTSE-S as an example, when an SI-SDR
loss is applied, the AR generative output (O = G) achieves the
best perceptual quality for this configuration, with DNSMOS-
OVRL of approximately 3.33 and NISQA of 4.416, while
maintaining high speaker similarity scores. However, the
dWER remains at 0.154, indicating that although AR inference
maximizes perceptual quality, it is still susceptible to semantic
errors and content drift.
When switching to NAR inference and gradually increasing
the injection ratio R, a clear trade-off between perceptual
quality and intelligibility is observed. As R increases from 0 to
1, DNSMOS-OVRL and NISQA decrease monotonically from
approximately 3.33/4.416 to 3.23/4.060, while dWER consis-
tently improves from 0.154 to 0.133. These results indicate
that using discriminative front-end outputs as pseudo-labels
effectively suppresses auto-regressive drift and hallucination,
at the cost of moderate perceptual quality degradation, in
exchange for improved semantic stability and intelligibility.
A highly consistent trend is observed for the larger front-end
configuration (USEF-LauraTSE-L). Under AR inference, the
model again achieves the highest perceptual quality. In NAR
mode, increasing R leads to a slight reduction in perceptual
metrics (e.g., NISQA decreases from 4.450 to 4.302), while
further reducing dWER from 0.112 to 0.099. This consistency
across different front-end scales suggests that AR inference
prioritizes perceptual quality, whereas NAR inference en-
hances intelligibility by constraining the generative process.
It is worth noting that the cascaded baseline USEF-
13
TABLE VI
RESULTS ON THE LIBRI2MIX CLEAN TEST SET FOR USEF-LAURA-TSE UNDER AUTO-REGRESSIVE (AR) AND NON-AUTO-REGRESSIVE (NAR)
INFERENCE. IN THE “MODEL” COLUMN, “USEF-TFGRIDNET-L + LAURATSE (SPLIT)” DENOTES THAT USEF-TFGRIDNET-L AND LAURATSE ARE
TRAINED SEPARATELY, AND DURING NAR INFERENCE THE OUTPUTS OF USEF-TFGRIDNET-L ARE USED AS PSEUDO LABELS FOR THE GENERATIVE
MODEL. IN THE “INFERENCE MODE” COLUMN, “AR” INDICATES AUTOREGRESSIVE INFERENCE AND “NAR” INDICATES NON-AUTOREGRESSIVE
INFERENCE. “R” DENOTES THE INJECTION RATIO OF THE DISCRIMINATIVE OUTPUTS. “SBERT” DENOTES THE SPEECHBERT SCORE.
Model
Inference
Mode
SI-SDR
Loss?
O
R
DNSMOS
NISQA
SBERT
dWER
WavLM
Wespeaker
SIG
BAK
OVRL
USEF-Laura-TSE-S
AR
No
D
-
1.187
1.144
1.100
1.014
0.451
0.693
0.672
0.642
No
G
-
3.592
4.061
3.313
4.453
0.925
0.120
0.978
0.895
NAR
No
G
0.0
2.647
2.061
1.905
1.864
0.473
1.024
0.796
0.661
No
G
0.5
2.452
1.768
1.724
1.635
0.454
1.069
0.782
0.647
No
G
1.0
1.844
1.353
1.404
1.362
0.424
1.105
0.752
0.637
USEF-Laura-TSE-S
AR
Yes
D
-
3.422
3.661
2.979
3.172
0.884
0.113
0.977
0.934
Yes
G
-
3.603
4.080
3.329
4.416
0.915
0.154
0.975
0.880
NAR
Yes
G
0.0
3.590
4.027
3.291
4.217
0.910
0.149
0.975
0.881
Yes
G
0.5
3.578
3.991
3.263
4.099
0.907
0.148
0.975
0.882
Yes
G
1.0
3.568
3.944
3.232
3.960
0.906
0.133
0.975
0.883
USEF-TFGridNet-L
+ LauraTSE (split)
AR
-
D
-
3.555
4.051
3.272
4.319
0.935
0.075
0.988
0.968
-
G
-
3.609
4.084
3.336
4.333
0.908
0.159
0.974
0.876
NAR
-
G
0.0
3.587
4.089
3.322
4.512
0.881
0.216
0.969
0.866
-
G
0.5
3.604
4.101
3.343
4.553
0.898
0.166
0.972
0.872
-
G
1.0
3.619
4.114
3.363
4.583
0.913
0.120
0.974
0.878
USEF-Laura-TSE-L
AR
Yes
D
-
3.528
3.955
3.202
3.648
0.933
0.076
0.987
0.950
Yes
G
-
3.592
4.075
3.319
4.450
0.934
0.117
0.982
0.902
NAR
Yes
G
0.0
3.580
4.048
3.294
4.346
0.927
0.115
0.981
0.901
Yes
G
0.5
3.574
4.035
3.283
4.316
0.927
0.112
0.981
0.902
Yes
G
1.0
3.570
4.022
3.272
4.302
0.929
0.099
0.982
0.903
TFGridNet-L + LauraTSE (decoupled training) achieves the
highest DNSMOS-OVRL and NISQA scores across all config-
urations. This behavior can be attributed to the independently
trained discriminative front-end, which provides near-ideal
magnitude spectra, and a fully decoupled generative back-end
that focuses exclusively on waveform reconstruction without
being constrained by SI-SDR loss during joint training. How-
ever, this configuration exhibits inferior dWER and speaker
similarity compared with the jointly trained USEF-LauraTSE-
L, revealing a clear trade-off between perceptual quality
and content fidelity. In contrast, the jointly trained USEF-
LauraTSE-L achieves a more balanced trade-off among per-
ceptual quality, intelligibility, and speaker consistency. These
results suggest that moderate SI-SDR constraints combined
with end-to-end optimization effectively prevent excessive
generative freedom, thereby improving the reliability and
stability of the overall system.
Overall, the USEF-Laura-TSE enables a controllable trade-
off between speech quality and intelligibility under a unified
training paradigm by flexibly switching between AR and
NAR inference modes and adjusting the injection ratio R
at inference time. When perceptual quality is the primary
objective, pure auto-regressive inference is preferred; when
higher intelligibility, ASR robustness, or semantic consistency
is required, NAR inference with a larger R provides a more
suitable solution by explicitly guiding the generative model
with discriminative front-end outputs.
C. Comparison With Previous Models
Table VII summarizes the overall experimental results on
the Libri2Mix dataset. The proposed discriminative–generative
model USEF-Laura-TSE-L achieves a more balanced perfor-
mance across perceptual quality, semantic fidelity, and speaker
consistency. Compared with the purely generative LauraTSE,
USEF-Laura-TSE-L significantly improves semantic consis-
tency and speaker similarity, with dWER reduced from 0.159
to 0.117, and speaker similarity increased from 0.974/0.876 to
0.982/0.902 (WavLM/WeSpeaker), while maintaining compa-
rable DNSMOS-OVRL and achieving the best NISQA score
(4.450) among all systems. This indicates that a stronger
discriminative front-end (USEF-TFGridNet-L) provides more
reliable and structured intermediate representations, which
effectively guide the generative back-end toward improved
content stability without sacrificing perceptual quality.
Compared with the strong discriminative baseline USEF-
TFGridNet-L [45], which attains the best dWER and speaker
similarity, USEF-Laura-TSE-L substantially improves per-
ceptual quality (DNSMOS-OVRL and NISQA), demonstrat-
ing that the discriminative–generative framework effectively
bridges the gap between discriminative robustness and gen-
erative naturalness. Moreover, despite being trained on only
460 hours of data, USEF-Laura-TSE-L achieves performance
comparable to or better than large-scale generative systems
such as AnyEnhance [49], highlighting the data efficiency
and effectiveness of task-oriented discriminative–generative
modeling for target speaker extraction.
Overall, these results confirm that combining a strong dis-
criminative front-end with a generative AR decoder-only back-
end yields a robust and well-balanced solution, validating the
effectiveness of the proposed discriminative–generative two-
stage paradigm.
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper first proposes LauraTSE, a generative tar-
get speaker extraction (TSE) method based on an auto-
regressive decoder-only language model. By leveraging con-
14
TABLE VII
RESULTS ON LIBRI2MIX CLEAN. IN THE ”CATEGORY” COLUMN, ”G” REFERS TO GENERATIVE MODELS, WHILE ”D” REFERS TO DISCRIMINATIVE
MODELS.
Model
Category
DNSMOS ↑
NISQA ↑
SBERT ↑
dWER ↓
WavLM ↑
Wespeaker ↑
SIG
BAK
OVL
Mixture
-
3.383
3.098
2.653
2.453
0.572
0.792
0.847
0.759
Spex+ [36]
D
3.472
4.027
3.186
3.349
0.878
0.148
0.973
0.935
WeSep [93]
D
3.486
3.838
3.118
3.892
0.895
0.123
0.980
0.945
USEF-TFGridNet-L [45]
D
3.555
4.051
3.272
4.319
0.935
0.0747
0.988
0.968
TSELM-L [52]
G
3.489
4.041
3.212
3.961
0.793
0.297
0.887
0.627
AnyEnhance [49]
G
3.638
4.066
3.353
4.277
0.735
-
0.914
-
LauraTSE
G
3.609
4.084
3.336
4.333
0.908
0.159
0.974
0.876
USEF-Laura-TSE-L
D-G
3.592
4.075
3.319
4.450
0.934
0.117
0.982
0.902
tinuous acoustic features and a neural audio codec, LauraTSE
enables end-to-end generative TSE without explicit speaker
embeddings. Experimental results demonstrate its competi-
tive performance in speech quality, speaker similarity, and
semantic consistency, and data-scaling experiments further
show stronger scalability than conventional discriminative
models. Analysis reveals that coarse auto-regressive generation
alone is insufficient for fine-grained reconstruction, motivating
the introduction of an encoder-only LM to refine acoustic
details. Building on this, the chapter presents a discrimi-
native–generative framework in which a USEF-TFGridNet-
based discriminative front-end provides structured target rep-
resentations to guide generative reconstruction. Experiments
show that the discriminative–generative design significantly
improves speaker consistency and intelligibility, validating
the complementary roles of discriminative and generative
modeling. Further exploration of SI-SDR–constrained training
and non-autoregressive inference highlights the framework’s
ability to achieve a controllable trade-off between perceptual
quality and semantic robustness.
REFERENCES
[1] E. C. Cherry, “Some experiments on the recognition of speech, with
one and with two ears,” Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
vol. 25, pp. 975–979, 1953.
[2] A. W. Bronkhorst, “The cocktail party phenomenon: A review of
research on speech intelligibility in multiple-talker conditions,” Acta
acustica united with acustica, vol. 86, no. 1, pp. 117–128, 2000.
[3] M. N. Schmidt and R. K. Olsson, “Single-channel speech separation
using sparse non-negative matrix factorization.” in Proc. of Interspeech,
vol. 2.
Citeseer, 2006, pp. 2–5.
[4] A. Cichocki, R. Zdunek, and S.-i. Amari, “New algorithms for non-
negative matrix factorization in applications to blind source separation,”
in 2006 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics Speech and Signal
Processing Proceedings, vol. 5, 2006, pp. V–V.
[5] R. Lyon, “A computational model of binaural localization and separa-
tion,” in Proc. of ICASSP, vol. 8, 1983, pp. 1148–1151.
[6] D. Wang and G. J. Brown, Computational auditory scene analysis:
Principles, algorithms, and applications.
Wiley-IEEE press, 2006.
[7] G. Hu and D. Wang, “Auditory segmentation based on onset and
offset analysis,” IEEE/ACM transactions on audio, speech, and language
processing, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 396–405, 2007.
[8] J. R. Hershey, Z. Chen, J. Le Roux, and S. Watanabe, “Deep clustering:
Discriminative embeddings for segmentation and separation,” in Proc.
of ICASSP, 2016, pp. 31–35.
[9] Y. Isik, J. L. Roux, Z. Chen, S. Watanabe, and J. R. Hershey, “Single-
channel multi-speaker separation using deep clustering,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1607.02173, 2016.
[10] Z.-Q. Wang, J. Le Roux, and J. R. Hershey, “Multi-channel deep
clustering: Discriminative spectral and spatial embeddings for speaker-
independent speech separation,” in Proc. of ICASSP, 2018, pp. 1–5.
[11] Z. Chen, Y. Luo, and N. Mesgarani, “Deep attractor network for single-
microphone speaker separation,” in Proc. of ICASSP, 2017, pp. 246–250.
[12] D. Wang and J. Chen, “Supervised speech separation based on deep
learning: An overview,” IEEE/ACM transactions on audio, speech, and
language processing, vol. 26, no. 10, pp. 1702–1726, 2018.
[13] Y. Luo, Z. Chen, and N. Mesgarani, “Speaker-independent speech
separation with deep attractor network,” IEEE/ACM transactions on
Audio, Speech, and Language Processing, vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 787–796,
2018.
[14] D. Yu, M. Kolbæk, Z.-H. Tan, and J. Jensen, “Permutation invariant
training of deep models for speaker-independent multi-talker speech
separation,” in Proc. of ICASSP, 2017, pp. 241–245.
[15] M. Kolbæk, D. Yu, Z.-H. Tan, and J. Jensen, “Multitalker speech
separation with utterance-level permutation invariant training of deep
recurrent neural networks,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech,
and Language Processing, vol. 25, no. 10, pp. 1901–1913, 2017.
[16] Y. Luo and N. Mesgarani, “Tasnet: time-domain audio separation
network for real-time, single-channel speech separation,” in Proc. of
ICASSP, 2018, pp. 696–700.
[17] Y. Luo, Z. Chen, and T. Yoshioka, “Dual-path rnn: efficient long
sequence modeling for time-domain single-channel speech separation,”
in Proc. of ICASSP, 2020, pp. 46–50.
[18] E. Tzinis, Z. Wang, and P. Smaragdis, “Sudo rm-rf: Efficient networks
for universal audio source separation,” in Proc. of MLSP, 2020, pp. 1–6.
[19] Y. Luo and N. Mesgarani, “Conv-tasnet: Surpassing ideal time–
frequency magnitude masking for speech separation,” IEEE/ACM trans-
actions on audio, speech, and language processing, vol. 27, no. 8, pp.
1256–1266, 2019.
[20] N. Zeghidour and D. Grangier, “Wavesplit: End-to-end speech separation
by speaker clustering,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and
Language Processing, vol. 29, pp. 2840–2849, 2021.
[21] C. Li, Y. Luo, C. Han, J. Li, T. Yoshioka, T. Zhou, M. Delcroix,
K. Kinoshita, C. Boeddeker, Y. Qian et al., “Dual-path rnn for long
recording speech separation,” in Proc. of SLT, 2021, pp. 865–872.
[22] J. Chen, Q. Mao, and D. Liu, “Dual-path transformer network: Direct
context-aware modeling for end-to-end monaural speech separation,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.13975, 2020.
[23] C. Subakan, M. Ravanelli, S. Cornell, M. Bronzi, and J. Zhong,
“Attention is all you need in speech separation,” in Proc. of ICASSP,
2021, pp. 21–25.
[24] K. Li, R. Yang, and X. Hu, “An efficient encoder-decoder architec-
ture with top-down attention for speech separation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2209.15200, 2022.
[25] J. Rixen and M. Renz, “Qdpn-quasi-dual-path network for single-
channel speech separation.” in Proc. of Interspeech, 2022, pp. 5353–
5357.
[26] J. Q. Yip, S. Zhao, Y. Ma, C. Ni, C. Zhang, H. Wang, T. H. Nguyen,
K. Zhou, D. Ng, E. S. Chng et al., “Spgm: Prioritizing local features
for enhanced speech separation performance,” in Proc. of ICASSP, 2024,
pp. 326–330.
[27] S. Zhao and B. Ma, “Mossformer: Pushing the performance limit of
monaural speech separation using gated single-head transformer with
convolution-augmented joint self-attentions,” in Proc. of ICASSP, 2023,
pp. 1–5.
15
[28] S. Zhao, Y. Ma, C. Ni, C. Zhang, H. Wang, T. H. Nguyen, K. Zhou,
J. Q. Yip, D. Ng, and B. Ma, “Mossformer2: Combining transformer and
rnn-free recurrent network for enhanced time-domain monaural speech
separation,” in Proc. of ICASSP, 2024, pp. 10 356–10 360.
[29] Q. Wang, H. Muckenhirn, K. Wilson, P. Sridhar, Z. Wu, J. R. Hershey,
R. A. Saurous, R. J. Weiss, Y. Jia, and I. L. Moreno, “VoiceFilter: Tar-
geted Voice Separation by Speaker-Conditioned Spectrogram Masking,”
in Proc. of Interspeech, 2019, pp. 2728–2732.
[30] K. ˇZmol´ıkov´a, M. Delcroix, K. Kinoshita, T. Ochiai, T. Nakatani, L. Bur-
get, and J. ˇCernock`y, “Speakerbeam: Speaker aware neural network for
target speaker extraction in speech mixtures,” IEEE Journal of Selected
Topics in Signal Processing, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 800–814, 2019.
[31] M. Delcroix, T. Ochiai, K. Zmolikova, K. Kinoshita, N. Tawara,
T. Nakatani, and S. Araki, “Improving speaker discrimination of target
speech extraction with time-domain speakerbeam,” in Proc. of ICASSP,
2020, pp. 691–695.
[32] Y. Hao, J. Xu, J. Shi, P. Zhang, L. Qin, and B. Xu, “A unified framework
for low-latency speaker extraction in cocktail party environments.” in
Proc. of Interspeech, 2020, pp. 1431–1435.
[33] T. Li, Q. Lin, Y. Bao, and M. Li, “Atss-Net: Target Speaker Separation
via Attention-Based Neural Network,” in Proc. of Interspeech, 2020, pp.
1411–1415.
[34] Z. Zhang, B. He, and Z. Zhang, “X-tasnet: Robust and accurate time-
domain speaker extraction network,” in Proc. of Interspeech, 2020.
[35] C. Xu, W. Rao, E. S. Chng, and H. Li, “Spex: Multi-scale time domain
speaker extraction network,” IEEE/ACM transactions on audio, speech,
and language processing, vol. 28, pp. 1370–1384, 2020.
[36] M. Ge, C. Xu, L. Wang, E. S. Chng, J. Dang, and H. Li, “Spex+:
A complete time domain speaker extraction network,” in Proc. of
Interspeech, 2020, pp. 1406–1410.
[37] W. Wang, C. Xu, M. Ge, and H. Li, “Neural speaker extraction with
speaker-speech cross-attention network.” in Proc. of Interspeech, 2021,
pp. 3535–3539.
[38] M. Ge, C. Xu, L. Wang, E. S. Chng, J. Dang, and H. Li, “Multi-stage
speaker extraction with utterance and frame-level reference signals,” in
Proc. of ICASSP, 2021, pp. 6109–6113.
[39] K. Liu, Z. Du, X. Wan, and H. Zhou, “X-sepformer: End-to-end speaker
extraction network with explicit optimization on speaker confusion,” in
Proc. of ICASSP, 2023, pp. 1–5.
[40] F. Hao, X. Li, and C. Zheng, “X-tf-gridnet: A time–frequency domain
target speaker extraction network with adaptive speaker embedding
fusion,” Information Fusion, vol. 112, p. 102550, 2024.
[41] M. Elminshawi, W. Mack, S. R. Chetupalli, S. Chakrabarty, and E. A.
Habets, “New insights on target speaker extraction,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2202.00733, 2022.
[42] B. Zeng, H. Suo, Y. Wan, and M. Li, “Sef-net: Speaker embedding free
target speaker extraction network,” in Proc. of Interspeech, 2023, pp.
3452–3456.
[43] Y. Hu, H. Xu, Z. Guo, H. Huang, and L. He, “Smma-net: An audio clue-
based target speaker extraction network with spectrogram matching and
mutual attention,” in Proc. of ICASSP, 2024, pp. 1496–1500.
[44] X. Yang, C. Bao, J. Zhou, and X. Chen, “Target speaker extraction
by directly exploiting contextual information in the time-frequency
domain,” in Proc. of ICASSP, 2024, pp. 10 476–10 480.
[45] B. Zeng and M. Li, “Usef-tse: Universal speaker embedding free target
speaker extraction,” IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech and Language
Processing, vol. 33, pp. 2110–2124, 2025.
[46] P. Wang, K. Tan et al., “Bridging the gap between monaural speech
enhancement and recognition with distortion-independent acoustic mod-
eling,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Pro-
cessing, vol. 28, pp. 39–48, 2019.
[47] N. Kamo, M. Delcroix, and T. Nakatani, “Target speech extraction with
conditional diffusion model,” in Proceeding of Interspeech, 2023, pp.
176–180.
[48] H. Erdogan, S. Wisdom, X. Chang, Z. Borsos, M. Tagliasacchi,
N. Zeghidour, and J. R. Hershey, “Tokensplit: Using discrete speech
representations for direct, refined, and transcript-conditioned speech
separation and recognition,” in Proceeding of Interspeech, 2023, pp.
3462–3466.
[49] J. Zhang, J. Yang, Z. Fang, Y. Wang, Z. Zhang, Z. Wang, F. Fan, and
Z. Wu, “Anyenhance: A unified generative model with prompt-guidance
and self-critic for voice enhancement,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.15417,
2025.
[50] B. Kang, X. Zhu, Z. Zhang, Z. Ye, M. Liu, Z. Wang, Y. Zhu, G. Ma,
J. Chen, L. Xiao et al., “Llase-g1: Incentivizing generalization capability
for llama-based speech enhancement,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.00493,
2025.
[51] R. Wang, L. Li, and T. Toda, “Dual-channel target speaker extraction
based on conditional variational autoencoder and directional infor-
mation,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language
Processing, vol. 32, pp. 1968–1979, 2024.
[52] B. Tang, B. Zeng, and M. Li, “Tselm: Target speaker extraction using
discrete tokens and language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.07841,
2024.
[53] S. Chen, C. Wang, Z. Chen, Y. Wu, S. Liu, Z. Chen, J. Li, N. Kanda,
T. Yoshioka, X. Xiao, J. Wu, L. Zhou, S. Ren, Y. Qian, Y. Qian, J. Wu,
M. Zeng, X. Yu, and F. Wei, “Wavlm: Large-scale self-supervised pre-
training for full stack speech processing,” IEEE Journal of Selected
Topics in Signal Processing, vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 1505–1518, 2022.
[54] X. Wang, M. Thakker, Z. Chen, N. Kanda, S. E. Eskimez, S. Chen,
M. Tang, S. Liu, J. Li, and T. Yoshioka, “Speechx: Neural codec lan-
guage model as a versatile speech transformer,” IEEE/ACM Transactions
on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing, 2024.
[55] B. Tang, B. Zeng, and M. Li, “Lauratse: Target speaker extraction
using auto-regressive decoder-only language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2504.07402, 2025.
[56] Q. Wang, I. L. Moreno, M. Saglam, K. Wilson, A. Chiao, R. Liu, Y. He,
W. Li, J. Pelecanos, M. Nika et al., “Voicefilter-lite: Streaming targeted
voice separation for on-device speech recognition,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2009.04323, 2020.
[57] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image
recognition,” in Proc. of ICPR, 2016, pp. 770–778.
[58] J. S. Chung, J. Huh, S. Mun, M. Lee, H. S. Heo, S. Choe, C. Ham,
S. Jung, B.-J. Lee, and I. Han, “In defence of metric learning for speaker
recognition,” in Proc. of Interspeech, 2020.
[59] L. Wan, Q. Wang, A. Papir, and I. L. Moreno, “Generalized end-to-end
loss for speaker verification,” in Proc. of ICASSP, 2018, pp. 4879–4883.
[60] J. Deng, J. Guo, N. Xue, and S. Zafeiriou, “Arcface: Additive angular
margin loss for deep face recognition,” in Proc. of ICPR, 2019, pp.
4690–4699.
[61] X. Xiao, Z. Chen, T. Yoshioka, H. Erdogan, C. Liu, D. Dimitriadis,
J. Droppo, and Y. Gong, “Single-channel speech extraction using speaker
inventory and attention network,” in Proc. of ICASSP, 2019, pp. 86–90.
[62] L. Yang, W. Liu, L. Tan, J. Yang, and H.-G. Moon, “Target speaker
extraction with ultra-short reference speech by ve-ve framework,” in
Proc. of ICASSP, 2023, pp. 1–5.
[63] D. Snyder, D. Garcia-Romero, G. Sell, D. Povey, and S. Khudanpur,
“X-vectors: Robust dnn embeddings for speaker recognition,” in Proc.
of ICASSP, 2018, pp. 5329–5333.
[64] A. Li, G. Yu, Z. Xu, C. Fan, X. Li, and C. Zheng, “Tabe: Decoupling
spatial and spectral processing with taylor’s unfolding method in the
beamspace domain for multi-channel speech enhancement,” Information
Fusion, vol. 101, p. 101976, 2024.
[65] R. Scheibler, Y. Ji, S.-W. Chung, J. Byun, S. Choe, and M.-S. Choi,
“Diffusion-based generative speech source separation,” in ICASSP 2023-
2023 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing (ICASSP).
IEEE, 2023, pp. 1–5.
[66] J. Richter, S. Welker, J.-M. Lemercier, B. Lay, and T. Gerkmann,
“Speech enhancement and dereverberation with diffusion-based genera-
tive models,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language
Processing, vol. 31, pp. 2351–2364, 2023.
[67] Y.-J. Lu, Z.-Q. Wang, S. Watanabe, A. Richard, C. Yu, and Y. Tsao,
“Conditional diffusion probabilistic model for speech enhancement,” in
ICASSP 2022-2022 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech
and Signal Processing (ICASSP).
Ieee, 2022, pp. 7402–7406.
[68] J.-M. Lemercier, J. Richter, S. Welker, and T. Gerkmann, “Storm: A
diffusion-based stochastic regeneration model for speech enhancement
and dereverberation,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and
Language Processing, vol. 31, pp. 2724–2737, 2023.
[69] N. Kamo, M. Delcroix, and T. Nakatani, “Target speech extraction with
conditional diffusion model,” in Interspeech 2023, 2023, pp. 176–180.
[70] L. Zhang, Y. Qian, L. Yu, H. Wang, H. Yang, S. Liu, L. Zhou,
and Y. Qian, “Ddtse: Discriminative diffusion model for target speech
extraction,” in 2024 IEEE Spoken Language Technology Workshop
(SLT).
IEEE, 2024, pp. 294–301.
[71] R. Wang, L. Li, and T. Toda, “Target speaker extraction based on
conditional variational autoencoder and directional information in un-
derdetermined condition,” IEICE Technical Report; IEICE Tech. Rep.,
vol. 121, no. 383, pp. 76–81, 2022.
[72] ——, “Dual-channel target speaker extraction based on conditional
variational autoencoder and directional information,” IEEE/ACM Trans-
actions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing, vol. 32, pp. 1968–
1979, 2024.
16
[73] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “Bert: Pre-training
of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 2019 conference of the North American chapter of the
association for computational linguistics: human language technologies,
volume 1 (long and short papers), 2019, pp. 4171–4186.
[74] T. Brown, B. Mann, N. Ryder, M. Subbiah, J. D. Kaplan, P. Dhariwal,
A. Neelakantan, P. Shyam, G. Sastry, A. Askell et al., “Language mod-
els are few-shot learners,” Advances in neural information processing
systems, vol. 33, pp. 1877–1901, 2020.
[75] C. Raffel, N. Shazeer, A. Roberts, K. Lee, S. Narang, M. Matena,
Y. Zhou, W. Li, and P. J. Liu, “Exploring the limits of transfer learning
with a unified text-to-text transformer,” Journal of machine learning
research, vol. 21, no. 140, pp. 1–67, 2020.
[76] Z. Du, S. Zhang, K. Hu, and S. Zheng, “Funcodec: A fundamental,
reproducible and integrable open-source toolkit for neural speech codec,”
in Proceeding of IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech
and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2024, pp. 591–595.
[77] Z. Du, J. Wang, Q. Chen, Y. Chu, Z. Gao, Z. Li, K. Hu, X. Zhou, J. Xu,
Z. Ma et al., “Lauragpt: Listen, attend, understand, and regenerate audio
with gpt,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.04673, 2023.
[78] A. Gulati, J. Qin, C.-C. Chiu, N. Parmar, Y. Zhang, J. Yu, W. Han,
S. Wang, Z. Zhang, Y. Wu, and R. Pang, “Conformer: Convolution-
augmented transformer for speech recognition,” in Proceeding of Inter-
speech, 2020, pp. 5036–5040.
[79] V. Panayotov, G. Chen, D. Povey, and S. Khudanpur, “Librispeech: an
asr corpus based on public domain audio books,” in Proceeding of IEEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP), 2015, pp. 5206–5210.
[80] J. Cosentino, M. Pariente, S. Cornell, A. Deleforge, and E. Vincent,
“Librimix: An open-source dataset for generalizable speech separation,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.11262, 2020.
[81] J. Le Roux, S. Wisdom, H. Erdogan, and J. R. Hershey, “Sdr–half-baked
or well done?” in Proc. of ICASSP, 2019, pp. 626–630.
[82] D. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
in Proc. of ICLR, San Diega, CA, USA, 2015.
[83] A. W. Rix, J. G. Beerends, M. P. Hollier, and A. P. Hekstra, “Perceptual
evaluation of speech quality (pesq)-a new method for speech quality
assessment of telephone networks and codecs,” in Proceeding of IEEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP), vol. 2, 2001, pp. 749–752.
[84] C. H. Taal, R. C. Hendriks, R. Heusdens, and J. Jensen, “A short-
time objective intelligibility measure for time-frequency weighted noisy
speech,” in Proceeding of IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2010, pp. 4214–4217.
[85] C. K. Reddy, V. Gopal, and R. Cutler, “Dnsmos p. 835: A non-intrusive
perceptual objective speech quality metric to evaluate noise suppressors,”
in Proceeding of IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech
and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2022, pp. 886–890.
[86] G. Mittag, B. Naderi, A. Chehadi, and S. M¨oller, “Nisqa: A deep cnn-
self-attention model for multidimensional speech quality prediction with
crowdsourced datasets,” in Proceeding of Interspeech, 2021, pp. 2127–
2131.
[87] T. Saeki, S. Maiti, S. Takamichi, S. Watanabe, and H. Saruwatari,
“Speechbertscore: Reference-aware automatic evaluation of speech gen-
eration leveraging nlp evaluation metrics,” in Proceeding of Interspeech,
2024, pp. 4943–4947.
[88] W.-N. Hsu, B. Bolte, Y.-H. H. Tsai, K. Lakhotia, R. Salakhutdinov, and
A. Mohamed, “Hubert: Self-supervised speech representation learning
by masked prediction of hidden units,” IEEE/ACM transactions on
audio, speech, and language processing, vol. 29, pp. 3451–3460, 2021.
[89] Z.-Q. Wang, H. Erdogan, S. Wisdom, K. Wilson, D. Raj, S. Watanabe,
Z. Chen, and J. R. Hershey, “Sequential multi-frame neural beamforming
for speech separation and enhancement,” in Proceeding of IEEE Spoken
Language Technology Workshop (SLT), 2021, pp. 905–911.
[90] A. Radford, J. W. Kim, T. Xu, G. Brockman, C. McLeavey, and
I. Sutskever, “Robust speech recognition via large-scale weak super-
vision,” in Proceeding of International conference on machine learning,
2023, pp. 28 492–28 518.
[91] H. Wang, C. Liang, S. Wang, Z. Chen, B. Zhang, X. Xiang, Y. Deng,
and Y. Qian, “Wespeaker: A research and production oriented speaker
embedding learning toolkit,” in Proceeding of IEEE International Con-
ference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2023,
pp. 1–5.
[92] Y. Bengio, N. L´eonard, and A. C. Courville, “Estimating or propagat-
ing gradients through stochastic neurons for conditional computation,”
CoRR, vol. abs/1308.3432, 2013.
[93] S. Wang, K. Zhang, S. Lin, J. Li, X. Wang, M. Ge, J. Yu, Y. Qian,
and H. Li, “Wesep: A scalable and flexible toolkit towards generalizable
target speaker extraction,” in Proceeding of Interspeech, 2024, pp. 4273–
4277.
